In a Lego universe, wizard Vitruvius fails to protect a superweapon called the Kragle—a tube of adhesive—from the maniacal Lord Business, but prophesies that a person called "the Special" will find the Piece of Resistance, an item capable of stopping the Kragle.
Eight and a half years later, in Bricksburg, an optimistic but unimaginative construction worker, Emmet Brickowski, encounters a woman searching at his construction site. Emmet falls into a pit and finds the Piece of Resistance. Compelled to touch it, he experiences visions, including one of a being dubbed "The Man Upstairs", and passes out. He awakens in the custody of Bad Cop, Business's lieutenant, and discovers that the Piece of Resistance is stuck to his back. Emmet learns of Business' plans to freeze the world with the Kragle; the Piece of Resistance is the tube's cap. The woman, self-named Wyldstyle, rescues Emmet, believing him to be the Special. They escape Bad Cop and travel to "The Old West", where they rendezvous with Vitruvius. He and Wyldstyle are Master Builders—beings capable of building anything without instruction manuals—who oppose Business' attempts to suppress their creativity. Though disappointed that Emmet is not a Master Builder, they are convinced of his potential when he recalls visions of the Man Upstairs.
Emmet, Wyldstyle, and Vitruvius evade Bad Cop's robot police with the help of Batman, Wyldstyle's boyfriend, and escape to "Cloud Cuckoo Land", which serves as the Master Builders' refuge. Following Emmet's confession about not being a Master Builder, everyone is unimpressed with and reject him. Soon after, Business' forces attack and capture everyone except Emmet's group and fellow Master Builders MetalBeard, Unikitty and Benny. After saving the group with his double-decker couch invention, Emmet devises a plan to infiltrate Business' headquarters and disarm the Kragle. The heist almost succeeds until the group is captured and imprisoned as Business murders Vitruvius and throws the Piece of Resistance into an abyss before arming a device to electrocute the captured Master Builders. Before he dies, Vitruvius reveals he made up the prophecy, but his spirit returns to tell Emmet that his self-belief makes him the Special. Strapped to the mechanism's battery, Emmet drops off the edge of the tower and into the abyss, disarming the device and saving everyone. Inspired by Emmet's sacrifice, Wyldstyle (who earlier revealed to Emmet that her real name is Lucy) rallies the people across the universe to embrace their creativity to build machines and weapons to fight Business' forces.
The abyss transports Emmet to real life, where current events are being played out in a basement by a boy named Finn on his father's Lego collection. The father, revealed to be the Man Upstairs, chastises his son for creating hodgepodges of different playsets and begins to glue his creations into place. Realizing the danger, Emmet wills himself to move and gains Finn's attention. Finn returns Emmet and the Piece of Resistance to the Lego world, where Emmet finds he has gained the abilities of a Master Builder as he confronts Business. Meanwhile, Finn's father notices his son's creations and realizes he is suppressing his creativity. Through a speech from Emmet to Business, Finn tells his father that he is special and says he has the power to change everything. The duo then reconcile, which plays out as Business reforming, capping the Kragle with the Piece of Resistance and reversing its effects with mineral spirits. After the world is restored, Lucy and Emmet enter a relationship with Batman's blessing. Finn's father grants Finn and his younger sister permission to play with the Lego sets, leading to Duplo aliens invading the Lego universe.