In the futuristic city of San Fransokyo, Hiro Hamada, a 14-year-old high school graduate and robotics prodigy, spends his time competing in illegal underground robot fights. Hoping to get him out of this dangerous lifestyle, his inventive older brother Tadashi takes him to the San Fransokyo Institute of Technology, where Hiro meets Tadashi's four best friends – gritty Go Go Tomago, neurotic Wasabi, bubbly Honey Lemon and comic book fan Fred. Tadashi also introduces his project, inflatable healthcare robot Baymax. After meeting Tadashi's mentor Professor Robert Callaghan, Hiro applies to the university, impressing the school's showcase with his project—microbots that can link together into any configuration using a neural transmitter. Hiro is accepted, but the celebration is brief when a fire breaks out while Callaghan is still in the building. Tadashi rushes back inside to save him, only for the building to explode, with both declared dead.
Two weeks later, Hiro inadvertently activates Baymax. Hiro's only remaining microbot begins to move on its own, so he and Baymax follow it to an abandoned warehouse. Inside, they discover the microbots being mass-produced by a Kabuki mask-wearing supervillain known as "Yokai", who tries to dispose of Hiro and Baymax, but they narrowly escape. Deducing that Yokai was the mastermind behind the fire, Hiro weaponizes Baymax for defense, and Hiro's friends, whom Baymax contacted, meet up with them. Yokai pursues the group through the streets, but Baymax saves them. At Fred's house, Hiro upgrades Baymax and the group weaponizes their own inventions to combat Yokai.
Believing Yokai to be Alistair Krei, a tech mogul who had wanted to buy the microbots at the showcase, the group tracks him to an abandoned Krei Tech laboratory on a remote island. They discover it was used for teleportation research, but the government shut it down after a prototype portal destabilized, trapping a test pilot inside. The group are soon ambushed by Yokai, but they manage to remove his mask and he is revealed to actually be Callaghan, who had faked his death using the stolen microbots.
Hiro, enraged at Callaghan's indifference to Tadashi's death, removes Baymax's healthcare chip and orders him to kill Callaghan despite his friends' objections. Baymax obeys Hiro's commands before the rest of the group reinstall his healthcare chip, returning him to his former personality as Callaghan escapes. Feeling betrayed by his friends' actions, Hiro leaves with Baymax, intent on avenging Tadashi. Back at home, Baymax recognizes Hiro's recklessness and shows him archived footage of his development, reminding him that Tadashi's goal was to help others. Through research, they and the rest of the group discover that the lost test pilot was Callaghan's daughter, Abigail. Now prepared to take revenge on Krei, Callaghan reactivates the teleportation portal to demolish his company's headquarters, but the heroes defeat him and save Krei.
Baymax detects Abigail still alive inside the portal. Despite Krei's warnings about the portal being too unstable, Baymax and Hiro enter it and find Abigail trapped in stasis. Baymax is struck by debris, damaging him and forcing Hiro to leave him behind. Baymax uses his rocket fist to propel Hiro and Abigail out of the portal before it is destroyed. In the aftermath, the awakened Abigail is taken to the hospital while her father, now relieved that she is saved, is taken into custody for his crimes. Sometime later, after beginning his tenure at the institute with his friends, Hiro discovers Baymax's healthcare chip clenched in the rocket fist. He rebuilds Baymax and they and their friends continue to protect the city as a team of high-tech superheroes called Big Hero 6 on behalf of Tadashi.
In a post-credits scene, Fred is back at his mansion, talking to a picture of his father, telling him he'd be proud of him. Fred accidentally opens a secret door and upon entering, he finds weapons, armor, and superhero gear. His father arrives and states that they have a lot to talk about, and the two embrace.