As a child, Mike Wazowski goes on a school field trip to the Monsters Inc. factory, where "scarers" harness human children's screams for energy to power the monster world. He secretly follows a scarer through a door into the human world to watch him work; the scarer warns Mike that this was a dangerous thing to do, but commends him for his stealth and skill and gives him a Monsters University (MU) cap. 
Years later, Mike enrolls in the scaring program at MU and is assigned Randall "Randy" Boggs as a roommate. On the first day of class, Abigail Hardscrabble, the dean of the scaring program and president of MU, warns that students who fail the first semester's final exam will leave the scaring program. Mike then encounters James P. "Sulley" Sullivan, the son of a famous scarer. Sulley gets into the top fraternity on campus, RΩR (Roar Omega Roar), which rejects Mike for not looking scary enough. Over the next few months, Mike works and studies hard to improve himself while Sulley slacks off, relying on his family name and natural talent. An intense rivalry gradually forms between Mike and Sulley; on exam day, this rivalry culminates in the inadvertent destruction of Hardscrabble's prized scream canister. She personally tests Sulley, who fails due to haste and lack of technical knowledge; he is promptly kicked out of both the scare program and RΩR. Mike is not allowed to complete the test due to not being physically scary, and is also dismissed from the program.
Next semester, both Sulley and Mike are forced to switch majors to scream can design. Sulley blames Mike for what has happened; determined to prove his worth, Mike enters the annual Scare Games with OK (Oozma Kappa), a small fraternity of misfits who have also failed out of the scare program, as his team. He makes a deal with Hardscrabble; if OK wins, they will be allowed back into the program, but if they lose, Mike will be expelled from the university. Sulley volunteers to join the team as well, but Randy betrays Mike and joins RΩR, ending their friendship. Due to Mike and Sulley's squabbling, OK places last in the first round, but are saved from elimination when another team is disqualified for cheating. They also barely pass the second round, and the RΩRs invite OK to a mid-game party, only to humiliate them and post pictures of the prank all over campus. 
OK becomes discouraged, so Mike takes them to Monsters Inc., where they sneak in and watch the scarers using their differences as advantages. After being chased off by security, the rejuvenated team begins to work together under Mike's coaching, and passes the next two challenges right behind RΩR. In the final challenge, OK and RΩR face off in a simulator in 1v1 matches, each member trying to frighten a dummy child. OK wins after Mike racks up a maximum score with his scare.
Mike is horrified to discover that Sulley had rigged the simulator's settings to guarantee a winning score on Mike's turn; the members of OK discard the trophy in disappointment as Sulley ashamedly admits his guilt to Hardscrabble. Outraged by Sulley's lack of faith in him, and determined to prove he is scary, Mike sneaks through an experimental door to the human world into a summer camp cabin full of children, only to find that none of them are afraid of him. Feeling responsible for Mike's predicament, Sulley sneaks past security and Hardscrabble to go after Mike. Sulley admits to Mike his own fears of inadequacy, and they make amends just as Hardscrabble deactivates the door to keep the other monsters safe from the humans. The duo collaborate to scare a group of park rangers, creating enough energy to power the door from their side; they escape just as it explodes.
Sulley and Mike are expelled from MU as punishment for their actions, but the other OK members are invited into the scaring program. As Mike and Sulley leave, Hardscrabble admits they surprised and impressed her; she wishes them well, and orders them to keep surprising people. The duo go to work for Monsters Inc. in the mailroom, and over the years work their way up through the company's ranks until Sulley becomes a scarer, with Mike as his scare assistant.