Nine years ago, Woody and Bo Peep rescue Andy's remote control car, RC, from being washed away in a storm, before Bo and her  lamp are donated to a new owner. Woody attempts to rescue her, but she insists it is okay as it is "time for the next kid". She asks Woody to come with her but when he hears Andy calling out for him, he chooses to stay.
In the present day, after a college-bound Andy has donated his toys to Bonnie, Woody struggles to adapt as Bonnie shows little interest in playing with him and her toys already have a leader. Bonnie is quite nervous about starting kindergarten, so Woody sneaks into her backpack as moral support. When she creates a spork at her kindergarten orientation, it comes to life as Forky. Forky suffers an existential crisis, seeing himself as trash, not a toy. As Forky quickly becomes Bonnie's favorite toy, Woody tries to stop Forky from throwing himself away.
When Bonnie's family goes on a road trip, Forky jumps out of the window of the RV, and Woody goes after him. As they walk to the park, Woody convinces Forky that his place is with Bonnie, and Forky overcomes his existential crisis. As they pass an antique store, he recognizes Bo Peep's lamp in the window, and detours inside to find her. They encounter a talking doll named Gabby Gabby and her ventriloquist dummy friends, who try to take Woody's voicebox to replace Gabby's broken one. Woody escapes, though Forky becomes Gabby's prisoner. At a playground nearby, Woody reunites with Bo and her sheep, who have become "lost toys", free from owners and able to do as they please, along with their new friend Giggle McDimples. They agree to help Woody rescue Forky.
Buzz Lightyear, trying to find Woody, gets lost in a traveling carnival and encounters prize toys Bunny and Ducky. They find Woody and Bo, who take them to stunt bike toy Duke Caboom. They attempt to rescue Forky, only to nearly get killed by the store owner's cat. The toys refuse to go back due to the danger, but Woody, who doesn't believe in leaving toys behind, inadvertently insults Bo's lost toy nature, leaving her and Buzz to rescue Forky. When he confronts Gabby, she explains that she means no harm only wanting his voice box so she can be played with by the store owner's granddaughter, Harmony. Woody agrees, only for Harmony to reject Gabby afterwards.
Woody sends Forky to the RV and convinces Gabby to return to Bonnie with him. Bo, Caboom, and the rest of the gang return and help the pair escape, and Bo and Woody reconcile. Jessie rallies Bonnie's toys to use the RV to drive back to the fair. On the way, Gabby notices a lost child at the carnival and leaves the group to comfort her until the parents arrive; the girl takes Gabby with her. Woody is hesitant to leave Bo again; Buzz assures him that Bonnie will be okay without him. Woody shares an emotional goodbye with his friends and joins Bo as a "lost toy". Some time later, the "lost toys" travel with the carnival and help prize toys find owners, while Bonnie creates a companion for Forky from a plastic knife.