New York City teenager Miles Morales struggles to live up to the expectations of his father, police officer Jefferson Davis, who sees Spider-Man as a menace. Miles's uncle Aaron takes him to an abandoned metro station to paint graffiti as a way to cheer him up. There, Miles is bitten by a radioactive spider and gains abilities similar to Spider-Man. Returning to the station, he discovers a collider built by Kingpin, who hopes to access parallel universes to abduct alternate versions of his late wife Vanessa and son Richard, whose deaths he condemns Spider-Man for.
Attempting to stop the collider while fighting Kingpin's enforcers, the Green Goblin and Prowler, Spider-Man is shoved into it by the former, causing an explosion that mortally wounds him as he then gives Miles a USB flash drive designed to sabotage the collider, warning that the machine could destroy the city if reactivated. After watching in horror as Kingpin murders Spider-Man, Miles flees. As the city mourns Spider-Man's death, Miles tries to honor his legacy by becoming the new Spider-Man, but inadvertently damages the drive. At Spider-Man's grave, he meets Peter B. Parker, a middle-aged and world-weary Spider-Man from another dimension.
The duo infiltrate Alchemax to steal data for a new flash drive. They are confronted by its proprietor, Olivia Octavius, who discovers that Peter will die from cellular decay if he remains in their dimension. She reveals herself as this universe's Doctor Octopus and attempts to attack, chasing Miles and Peter into the nearby forest. The duo are then saved by Gwen Stacy, a Spider-Woman from another dimension. Following her defeat, Octavius returns to the lab where a furious Kingpin is waiting for her, whom she reassures that getting rid of them will be no problem and he and his family will be reunited. They visit Spider-Man's aunt, May, who is sheltering more Spider-People from other dimensions who slipped into Miles' universe due to the collider's influence – Spider-Man Noir, Peni Parker and Spider-Ham – who are also deteriorating. Miles offers to help the others return home but they tell him he lacks experience.
Distraught, Miles retreats to Aaron's home, where he discovers his uncle is Prowler. He returns to the Parker house, where the new drive is completed, being followed by Kingpin's team. In the ensuing brawl, he reveals his identity to Aaron. Unwilling to murder his own nephew, Aaron attempts to spare Miles, but is fatally shot by Kingpin in retaliation and dies in Miles' arms. Miles flees just as Jefferson arrives on the scene and mistakes the new Spider-Man as his brother's murderer before regrouping with the other Spider-People. Not wanting to let Miles get killed, Peter restrains Miles and chooses to sacrifice himself by staying behind and deactivating the collider.
Jefferson arrives outside the door of Miles's dorm room as he apologizes for his mistakes and expresses his faith in Miles, inspiring him. Miles manages to control his powers, escapes his restraints and creates his own Spider-Man suit. He joins his allies in defeating Kingpin's enforcers and uses the new drive to send them home. Kingpin fights and overpowers Miles, attracting Jefferson's attention. Realizing that Spider-Man is not the menace he saw him as, he encourages Miles, who throws Kingpin at the collider's kill switch, destroying it. The city is saved and Kingpin's team is arrested as Jefferson receives evidence of Kingpin's murders of Aaron and the first Spider-Man.
Miles embraces the responsibilities of his new life. Later, Gwen finds a way to contact Miles from her home dimension. Elsewhere, Miguel O'Hara travels to Earth-67 and ends up arguing with its Spider-Man.