On Earth-65, Spider-Woman Gwen Stacy has become increasingly isolated from her friends and estranged from her father George. George is hunting Spider-Woman for killing Peter Parker, unaware that it was an accident after Peter turned into the Lizard. Gwen encounters a version of the Vulture from an Italian Renaissance–themed alternate universe, and Miguel O'Hara and Jess Drew arrive through dimensional portals to help neutralize him. George corners Gwen and she reveals her identity to him, and he attempts to arrest her before she leaves with Jess and Miguel.
In Brooklyn on Earth-1610, 16 months after Kingpin's defeat and the destruction of the Alchemax collider, Miles Morales is struggling with his duties as Spider-Man interfering with his personal life, and is grounded when he is late to a party celebrating his father Jeff's promotion to police captain. Miles encounters the Spot, an Alchemax scientist-turned-supervillain whose body was infused with portals during the collider's destruction. The Spot blames Miles for causing his mutation and reveals that the radioactive spider that bit Miles and gave him his powers came from an alternate universe, Earth-42, while the Spot was testing the collider. The Spot accidentally transports himself into a void and learns to use his portals to travel to other universes and empower himself by using Alchemax colliders in other dimensions. Gwen travels to Miles' dimension, and they reconnect, sharing their struggles. Miles attempts to convey his feelings towards Gwen but they remain unrequited.
Gwen secretly tracks the Spot and opens a portal to the next universe: Earth-50101. Miles discreetly follows Gwen into the portal, and the two team up with Earth-50101's local Spider-Man Pavitr Prabhakar, and later Hobie Brown, against the Spot. The Spot absorbs the power of that dimension's collider, and he and Miles share a vision of his future attacks, which include the deaths of Jeff and Police Inspector Singh, the father of Pavitr's girlfriend Gayatri. The Spot escapes and Miles saves Singh from the collider's destruction, but the world begins to collapse before other Spider-People arrive to contain the damage.
Miles, Gwen, and Hobie are taken to Nueva York in Earth-928, where a multiversal society of Spider-People, known as the Spider-Society, work together to combat multiversal threats. Miles meets Miguel, the leader of the Society, and reunites with Peter B. Parker, who introduces him to his infant daughter: Mayday Parker. Miguel explains to Miles that each Spider-Person's story contains "canon events", such as the death of a police captain close to Spider-Man, which cannot be disrupted; otherwise, that universe may collapse, which in turn could collapse the entire multiverse as a consequence. 
Miles realizes that the Spot killing Jeff is a canon event and is imprisoned by Miguel to prevent him from leaving. Miles frees himself with help from Hobie, and flees with the Society in pursuit. Miguel corners Miles and reveals that he was never supposed to be Spider-Man; the spider from Earth-42 wasn’t supposed to bite him, resulting in Earth-42 lacking a Spider-Man, the Spot’s creation, and the death of Earth-1610’s Peter Parker. Miles overpowers Miguel and, with help from Margo Kess, flees back to his own universe. Gwen stands up for Miles, and is angrily ejected to her own universe by Miguel.
At home, Gwen reunites with George and they reconcile when he reveals he has decided to resign from the force instead of arresting her. George gives Gwen a makeshift portal device left for her by Hobie. Gwen uses it to travel to Earth-1610 and begins searching for Miles, as do other members of the Society. Miles tries to reveal his secret identity to his mother Rio, much to her confusion. Miles and Gwen realize that he is in Earth-42 and not his own earth. In Earth-42, Miles' late uncle Aaron Davis is alive while Jeff is dead, and New York is crime-ridden due to the lack of a Spider-Man. 
Aaron restrains Miles, and is joined by Miles' Earth-42 counterpart, the Prowler. As the Spot begins his attack on Earth-1610's New York, Gwen promises Rio and Jeff that she will find Miles and teams up with Peter B., Mayday, Pavitr, Hobie, Margo, Spider-Man Noir, Peni Parker, and Spider-Ham, while Miles prepares to escape.