Having found a home with the Brown family in Windsor Gardens, Paddington begins working to buy a pop-up book of London in Samuel Gruber's antique shop for his aunt Lucy's 100th birthday, performing several odd jobs such as window cleaning and saving his wages. One night, he witnesses a burglary at the shop, in which the book is stolen. Paddington pursues the thief, but is framed and arrested, and the thief, revealed to be the Browns' neighbour, actor Phoenix Buchanan, escapes with the book. With no evidence of the thief's existence, Paddington is convicted and sentenced to ten years in prison.
Knuckles McGinty, the prison chef, recruits Paddington to work in the kitchen after tasting one of his marmalade sandwiches. Meanwhile, the Browns, seeking to exonerate Paddington, put up sketches of the thief all over London, while Buchanan uses clues within the book to locate a hidden fortune. Growing suspicious of Buchanan, Mary and Henry Brown break into his house, where they discover a secret attic filled with numerous costumes, including the one he wore during the burglary. They present the evidence to the police, who decline it. Meanwhile, Paddington believes that the Browns have forgotten him, after they miss a visit.
Paddington and Knuckles, along with two other inmates Phibs and Spoon, escape the prison at midnight. While Paddington's fellow escapees had initially promised to help prove his innocence, they later reveal that their true intention is to flee the country, prompting Paddington to abandon them. Paddington uses a public telephone to contact the Browns, who inform him that Buchanan is the real thief. Aiming to expose Buchanan, they arrange to meet at Paddington station, where a carnival train carrying the hidden fortune is due to depart.
Paddington, disguising himself as a litter bin, boards the train immediately before it leaves, and the Browns follow him in an LNER Peppercorn Class A1. Buchanan locks Paddington inside the train's brake van and severs the coupling, but is then subdued by Henry. The brake van rolls into a nearby river with Paddington trapped inside, but Knuckles, Phibs, and Spoon arrive and help Mary save Paddington.
Paddington falls into a coma, but wakes up on Aunt Lucy's birthday to find himself at home. He learns that he has been exonerated, Buchanan has been arrested, and the police have taken the book as evidence. Much to his delight, he also discovers that the Browns and their neighbours have arranged transport from Peru for Aunt Lucy to visit London in person.