Many years after his adventures with Shrek, Puss in Boots subdues a giant while hosting a party in the town of Del Mar, but is subsequently crushed by a church bell. After he recovers, the town doctor advises him to retire because he has already lost eight of his nine lives. Puss initially refuses but relents when he is wounded and disarmed while dueling a wolf bounty hunter at the local pub. 
Traumatized by the event, Puss follows the doctor's directions to the home of an elderly cat lady named Mama Luna, and buries his clothes. Months later, he meets an optimistic Chihuahua disguised as a cat, whom he calls Perrito. Crime family Goldilocks and the Three Bears soon arrive at Mama Luna's home, intending to hire Puss to help them steal a map displaying the location of the Wishing Star. They leave after finding his apparent grave, and Puss decides to find the Star to wish for another nine lives. 
Puss, followed by Perrito, heads to the factory lair of the corrupt pastry chef and magical artifact collector "Big" Jack Horner, who intends to use the Star to control all of the world's magic. While stealing the map from Horner, Puss encounters his resentful ex-fiancée Kitty Softpaws, who intends to take the map for herself. Goldi, the Bears, and Horner discover and chase the trio, and Puss briefly sees the wolf in the distance. They all end up in the Dark Forest, a pocket dimension that manifests illusions of travelers' memories. During the subsequent clash, Puss suffers a panic attack and flees after the wolf reappears, allowing Goldi to take the map from Kitty.
After Perrito finds Puss and calms him down, Puss confesses his fears and remorse for abandoning Kitty before their wedding. She overhears and tells him that she did not attend the wedding either, believing he loved himself too much to love her. Reinvigorated, Puss and Kitty retrieve the map while Goldi and the Bears are distracted by a manifestation of their woodland cottage. While escaping from Goldi and the Bears, Puss becomes trapped in the cave of lost souls, where reflections of his past lives ridicule him for changing his outlook. The wolf arrives and reveals himself as Death, who is insulted by Puss' failure to value any of his lives, so he intends to take his final life personally. Horrified, Puss runs out of the cave towards the Star, leaving Kitty and Perrito behind.
During an argument with Baby Bear, Goldi reveals she intends to wish for a human family. Though this hurts the Bears' feelings, they still agree to help her. Puss arrives at the Star and begins to make his wish, but Kitty arrives, berates him for his selfishness, and reveals she would have wished for someone she could trust. Goldi, the Bears, and Horner arrive, and a fight ensues for the map. Goldi briefly obtains it but abandons it to save Baby Bear, while Kitty traps Horner inside his magical bottomless bag.
When Death arrives and challenges Puss to a duel, Puss, having learned the value of a single life from his time with his companions, forgoes wishing for more lives and accepts Death's challenge. They duel and Puss temporarily disarms Death, declaring that, while he can never truly defeat Death, he will never stop fighting for his last life. Realizing Puss is no longer arrogant, Death begrudgingly spares him and leaves, though they both acknowledge that they will eventually meet again. 
Horner escapes the bag by eating a magic snack that transforms him into a giant. Perrito distracts him, allowing Puss, Kitty, and Goldi to destroy the map, which causes the Wishing Star to consume Horner and explode. Goldi affirms to the Bears that they are her true family, and they decide to take over Horner's business. Puss rekindles his romance with Kitty; with Perrito in tow, they steal a ship and head to the kingdom of Far Far Away to find new adventures and reunite with Shrek and friends.