In June 2021, high schooler Hodaka Morishima runs away from home. When his ferry to Tokyo is hit by a torrential rainstorm, he is almost washed away, but is saved by Keisuke Suga. Suga gives the boy his business card and tells him to call if he needs a job. Hodaka struggles to find work in the city. He finds an abandoned Makarov PM handgun and keeps it even though guns are illegal. He meets Hina Amano, a McDonald's employee, who pities him and gives him free food. Suga hires him as his assistant; he and his niece Natsumi publish a small occult magazine investigating strange phenomena, including the unusually rainy weather. They hear the legend of "sunshine girls" who can stop rain, and bring sunshine. Hodaka sees Hina being intimidated into working at a club and in panic, fires his gun at the club owner, barely missing him. Frightened, he throws the gun aside. Hina takes him to Yoyogi Kaikan, an abandoned building with a shrine on the roof, and amazes him by demonstrating her ability to clear the sky by praying. Hodaka learns that Hina is an orphan living alone with her younger brother Nagi. Seeing that they are also in financial trouble, Hodaka proposes they start a business having Hina clear the weather for social gatherings. Their business becomes a success, but Hina is filmed and shown on television, leading to their site getting flooded with requests. They decide to temporarily suspend business to let Hina rest. Meanwhile, Suga and Natsumi interview the old priest of a shrine who tells them the legend of "Weather Maidens" who can control the rain, adding that they pay a heavy price for their powers.
Meanwhile, police are searching for Hodaka, whose family has reported him missing. They trace him using security footage of him using the gun. Officers arrive at Hina's apartment and interrogate her; Hina realizes that because they have no legal guardian, social services will separate her and Nagi. Suga, also visited by the police, fires Hodaka, explaining that police suspect him of kidnapping, and gives him severance pay in cash. Hodaka, Hina, and Nagi decide to run away together. Meanwhile, torrential rain, unnatural cold, and even snow continue to descend on Tokyo. A state of emergency is declared in response to the severe and abnormal weather. Police spot Hodaka as a fugitive and restrain him, but he is saved by Hina, who unintentionally uses her powers to destroy a police van with lightning. They take shelter in a hotel using the cash Hodaka got from Suga. Hina reveals that her body is slowly turning transparent the more she uses her power, and says her sacrifice will allow the weather to return to normal. The next day, Hina has vanished and the rain has stopped. The police track Hodaka to the hotel and take him into custody. Nagi is sent to the children's counseling center. 
Hodaka, realizing that he has fallen in love with Hina, escapes from custody with the help of Suga's niece Natsumi. The police surround Hodaka in the abandoned building, but Suga, inspired by Hodaka's desperation to find Hina, helps him escape. At the rooftop shrine, Hodaka jumps through the torii gate and is transported into the sky, where he finds Hina and asks her to return with him, insisting that she let go of her worries about the weather and start living for herself. As soon as they return to the rooftop shrine, Hina, Hodaka, Natsumi, Nagi, and Suga are all arrested, and the heavy rains resume. Hodaka is sentenced to three years of probation and sent back to his home in Kōzu-shima.
Three years later, the rain has been falling without end in Tokyo, submerging much of the city. In spring 2024, having finished his probation, Hodaka graduates from high school and returns to Tokyo to start college. He meets with Suga, who has expanded his business. After Suga encourages him to find Hina, Hodaka finds her praying on a street overlooking the drowned city. They reunite, with Hodaka promising her that they will be all right.