In the early feudal Japan era, a 12-year-old boy with only one eye named Kubo tends to his ill mother, Sariatu, in a mountain cave near a village. He earns their living by manipulating origami with music from his magical shamisen (a Japanese stringed instrument), telling the tale of his missing father Hanzo, a samurai warrior. Kubo is never able to finish his story, as he does not know what happened to Hanzo and his mother cannot recall the end due to her deteriorating mental state. His mother warns him not to stay out after dark as her sisters Karasu and Washi, as well as his grandfather, the Moon King (who took his left eye when he was a baby) will find him and take his remaining eye.
One day, Kubo learns of the village's Bon Festival that allows them to speak to deceased loved ones. Kubo attends the festival, but is angry when Hanzo does not appear from his lantern, and consequently forgets to return home before sunset. The Sisters, Kubo's twin aunts, quickly find him and attack, but his mother suddenly appears and sends Kubo far away using her magic, telling him to find his father's armor. Kubo wakes up in a distant land to find that Monkey, his wooden snow monkey charm, has come alive. Monkey tells him that his mother is gone and the village has been destroyed. With the help of "Little Hanzo", an origami figure based on Kubo's father, they set out to find the armor. Along the way, they meet Beetle, an amnesiac samurai who was cursed to take the form of a stag beetle/human hybrid, but believes he once was a follower of Hanzo.
The three reclaim the "Sword Unbreakable" from a cave guarded by a giant skeleton. They cross the Long Lake in a leaf boat to locate the "Breastplate Impenetrable" deep underwater. Kubo and Beetle swim down to retrieve it and encounter the "Garden of Eyes", a sea monster that uses its many eyes to entrance its victims by showing them visions of secrets, then eats them while they are distracted. Kubo obtains the breastplate, but is caught in the creature's sight and, while entranced, realizes that Monkey is the reincarnated spirit of his mother. Beetle rescues the unconscious Kubo, but once they return to the boat, they find that Monkey has been badly wounded fighting and vanquishing one of her sisters.
Going ashore to recover, Monkey explains that she and her sisters were sent from the heavens and ordered by the Moon King to kill Hanzo, but she arrived early and instead fell in love with him, whereupon she was ousted from the sky. That night, Kubo dreams of meeting his grandfather, who points him towards the "Helmet Invulnerable" in Hanzo's abandoned fortress. They travel there the next day, but realize too late it is a trap. Sariatu's surviving sister appears and kills Beetle, revealing that he is Hanzo, cursed by the Moon King for taking his daughter away. Monkey sacrifices herself, buying Kubo the time to use his instrument to vanquish the Sister, breaking two of the three strings on it. Little Hanzo provides insight to Kubo that the helmet is actually the bell at the village, and Kubo breaks the last string to quickly travel there.
At the village, Kubo again meets the Moon King, who offers to take Kubo's other eye to make him perfect and immortal, but Kubo refuses. Angered, the Moon King transforms into the Moon Beast, a giant dunkleosteus-like creature, and pursues Kubo and the remaining villagers into the cemetery. When the armor proves ineffective, Kubo removes it and restrings his instrument using his father's bowstring, a strand of his mother's hair, and a strand of his own hair. Playing the instrument, he summons the spirits of the villagers' loved ones, to protect all of them from the Beast and to show the Moon King that memories are the strongest magic of all and can never be destroyed. Kubo and the spirits' magic strip the Moon King of his powers, leaving him a mortal old man without any memories.
Spurred on by Kubo's stories, the villagers choose compassion and tell him he was a man of many positive traits, accepting him into the village. Kubo is able to speak to his parents' ghosts during the subsequent Bon ceremony, as they watch the deceased villagers' lanterns transform into golden cranes and fly to the spirit world.