During the glory days of superheroes, Bob Parr (alias Mr. Incredible) thwarts a civilian's attempted suicide by tackling him through a skyscraper window. Bob discovers supervillain Bomb Voyage robbing the building, but is interrupted by his devoted fanboy Buddy Pine, who seeks to become his sidekick and uses his own inventions in place of superpowers. Bob rejects Buddy, and Voyage clips a bomb onto Buddy's cape. Bob chases after him and removes the bomb, but it destroys an elevated train track, forcing Bob to stop an oncoming passenger train. After his wedding with Helen (alias Elastigirl), Bob is sued for collateral damage by the suicidal civilian and the injured train passengers. Similar lawsuits create negative public image on superheroes, and the government initiates the Superhero Relocation Program, banning "supers" from using their powers in public and forcing them into hiding in exchange for amnesty and assistance.
Fifteen years later, Bob lives with Helen and their children, Violet, Dash, and baby Jack-Jack, in a quiet suburb of Metroville. Bob misses his superhero days and resents his mundane job as a claims adjuster, moonlighting as a vigilante with his friend Lucius Best (alias Frozone). The resulting property damage and attention from these outings often results in forced relocation for his family, creating tension with Helen. One day, Bob injures his supervisor Gilbert Huph in anger after he prevents him from stopping a mugger, and is consequently dismissed. That evening, a woman named Mirage secretly offers Bob a mission to subdue a giant "Omnidroid" robot loose on the island of Nomanisan. Bob succeeds by tricking the machine into ripping out its own power source. Rejuvenated by the action and higher pay, Bob trains to get back into shape, and asks superhero costume designer Edna Mode to fix a tear in his old suit. Incorrectly assuming that Helen knows of Bob's new job, Edna designs new suits for the entire family.
Summoned back to Nomanisan, Bob is attacked by the upgraded Omnidroid and discovers Mirage is working for Buddy, now calling himself Syndrome after being embittered by Bob's rejection. Syndrome has become wealthy by inventing weapons that mimic superpowers. Bob escapes from Syndrome and sneaks into his base, where he discovers he has been perfecting the Omnidroid by luring supers to fight it until it kills them. Helen visits Edna and learns what Bob has been up to. She activates a beacon Edna built into the suits to find Bob, inadvertently causing him to be captured.
Helen borrows a private plane to fly to Nomanisan; Violet and Dash stow away, leaving Jack-Jack with a babysitter. Despite knowing that there are children on the plane, Syndrome shoots it down. Bob threatens to kill Mirage, but cannot bring himself to do so, and Syndrome taunts him for it. Helen and the kids survive and make their way to the island. Disillusioned by Syndrome's callousness when her life was at risk, Mirage releases Bob and informs him of his family's survival. Syndrome's guards pursue Dash and Violet, who fend them off with their powers and reunite with their parents. Syndrome captures the family and unveils his plan to send the Omnidroid to attack Metroville, then defeat it publicly with secret controls. After gaining "hero" status, he also intends to sell his inventions to the world, thereby rendering superheroes meaningless. While Syndrome follows the Omnidroid to Metroville, Violet uses her powers to free her family, and Mirage helps them reach Metroville.
Recognizing Syndrome's remote-control gauntlet as a threat, the Omnidroid disarms and knocks him out. The Incredibles and Lucius fight the Omnidroid; Helen and the kids retrieve the remote control, allowing Bob to destroy the robot's power source. The family and Lucius are appreciated by the public just as Syndrome awakens to see their victory. Returning home, the Parrs find Syndrome abducting Jack-Jack to raise as a sidekick for revenge. As Syndrome flies up, Jack-Jack's superpowers manifest, and he escapes Syndrome's hold. Helen rescues the falling baby, and Bob throws his car at Syndrome's plane, sending him into one of its engines.
Three months later, the Parrs witness the arrival of supervillain the Underminer. They don their masks and suits, ready to face the new threat.