Remy, a young rat with heightened senses of taste and smell, dreams of becoming a chef like his human idol, the late Auguste Gusteau. Conversely, the rest of his colony, including his older brother Émile and their father, Django, the clan leader, only eat for sustenance and are wary of humans. The rats live in an elderly woman's attic outside Paris, but when the woman discovers them, Remy becomes separated from the others during their hasty evacuation. Encouraged by an imaginary Gusteau, he explores until he finds himself on the roof of Gusteau's namesake restaurant.
Remy sees the restaurant's new garbage boy, Alfredo Linguini, struggling to fix a leek soup he ruined. Remy sneaks in and improves the soup; Linguini notices and traps Remy while keeping his presence secret from Skinner, Gusteau's former sous-chef and the restaurant's new owner and head chef. Skinner confronts Linguini about the soup, but it is served by accident and unexpectedly becomes a hit. Colette Tatou, the restaurant's only female chef, persuades Skinner to keep Linguini and support Gusteau's motto, "Anyone can cook." Skinner demands Linguini replicate the soup but spots Remy, ordering Linguini to take him outside and kill him. Alone, Linguini realizes Remy understands him and persuades Remy to assist with cooking.
Remy discovers that he can control Linguini's movements like a marionette by pulling on his hair while hiding under his toque. They recreate the soup and continue cooking at the restaurant. Colette begrudgingly trains Linguini but steadily appreciates him heeding her advice. Later, Remy reunites with his clan. After Remy tells Django that he intends to stay at the restaurant, Django shows him a group of exterminated rats to convince him that humans are dangerous, but Remy defies his warnings and leaves.
Meanwhile, Skinner is shocked and enraged to discover through a letter from Linguini's late mother that Gusteau is Linguini's father, making him the rightful owner of the restaurant. After Skinner's lawyer verifies that Linguini is Gusteau's son, Skinner hides the evidence in an envelope; Remy steals the envelope and brings it to Linguini, who fires Skinner. The restaurant thrives as Remy's recipes become popular, and Linguini develops a romantic relationship with Colette. Food critic Anton Ego, who negatively reviewed the restaurant shortly before Gusteau's death, announces to Linguini that he will review the restaurant again the following day. After Linguini takes credit for Remy's cooking at a press conference, he and Remy have a falling out. As revenge, Remy leads his clan on a raid of the restaurant's pantries. Linguini arrives to apologize, but upon discovering the raid, he furiously expels Remy and his clan from the restaurant.
The next day, Skinner captures Remy, who is quickly freed by Django and Émile. After returning to the restaurant, he and Linguini reconcile, and Linguini reveals Remy and his cooking techniques to his staff, who all immediately quit. Django, impressed by Remy's grit, summons the clan to help him cook while Linguini waits tables. Reminded of Gusteau's motto, Colette returns to help. Skinner and a health inspector attempt to interfere, but the rats tie them up, gag them and lock them in the pantry.
Remy prepares confit byaldi, a variation of ratatouille, which evokes in Ego fond memories of his mother's cooking. Astonished and delighted, Ego asks to meet the chef and is stunned when introduced to Remy. The next day, he writes a glowing review, stating that he has come to understand Gusteau's motto and praising Remy without revealing that he is a rat. Skinner and the health inspector are released; as a result, Gusteau's is shut down, costing Ego his job and reputation. Remy, Linguini, and Colette open a bistro called La Ratatouille, which a now-happier Ego invests in and frequents. The rat colony settles into the bistro's attic as their new home.