In the 29th century, Earth is an inhospitable, garbage-strewn wasteland due to an ecocide caused by rampant consumerism, corporate greed, and environmental neglect. Humanity was evacuated to space by the megacorporation Buy n Large on giant spaceships 700 years earlier, leaving trash-compacting "WALL-E" robots to clean up the planet. All but one of the robots have stopped functioning; the last remaining active WALL-E has developed a personality. WALL-E remains active by salvaging parts from inactive robots, with his pet cockroach Hal as his only companion.
One day, WALL-E's routine of compressing trash and collecting interesting objects is broken by the arrival of a sleek, futuristic robot called EVE, who scans the planet for sustainable life. WALL-E is smitten by her, and the two begin to connect until EVE goes into standby mode when WALL-E shows her his most recent find: a living seedling. EVE is collected by a large unmanned rocket; with WALL-E clinging on, it returns to its mothership, the starliner Axiom.
In the centuries since the Axiom left Earth, its passengers have degenerated into helpless obesity due to microgravity and laziness, with robots catering to their every whim. Captain B. McCrea sits back while his robotic AI autopilot helm, nicknamed AUTO, pilots the ship. McCrea is unprepared for the positive probe response, but discovers that placing the plant in the ship's Holo-Detector will trigger a hyperjump back to Earth so that humanity can begin recolonization. When McCrea inspects EVE's storage compartment, the plant is missing, and EVE blames WALL-E for its disappearance.
EVE is deemed faulty and taken to diagnostics. WALL-E intervenes and inadvertently releases the other faulty bots, causing him and EVE to be designated rogue robots. EVE tries sending WALL-E home in an escape pod, but the two witness McCrea's first mate robot, GO-4, stowing the plant in a pod set to self-destruct. WALL-E enters the pod to retrieve the plant just as it launches, and he and the plant survive the pod's destruction. EVE catches up to him and they reconcile, dancing in space around the Axiom.
EVE brings the plant to McCrea, who watches her recordings of Earth, concluding that they must save it. AUTO reveals his secret no-return directive A113 from the ship's first captain, which orders them not to return to Earth on account of its toxicity levels. When McCrea tries overriding the directive, AUTO electrocutes WALL-E, throws him and EVE down a garbage chute, and confines McCrea to his quarters. EVE and WALL-E are nearly ejected into space with the Axiom's garbage, but a cleaning robot named M-O inadvertently jams the airlock and rescues them.
McCrea escapes by tricking AUTO with an image of the plant and fights for control of the Axiom, while humans and robots work to secure the real plant. AUTO crushes WALL-E using the Holo-Detector, but McCrea rises from his chair, activates the manual override and deactivates AUTO. EVE inserts the plant into the Holo-Detector, initiating the hyperjump back to Earth. Arriving on Earth, EVE repairs WALL-E, but his memory and personality have been erased. Heartbroken, EVE gives WALL-E a "kiss", which releases a static electricity shock, restoring him. WALL-E and EVE reunite as the Axiom inhabitants take their first steps on Earth. 
During the credits, humans and robots work to restore the ravaged planet, and the plant grows into a tree, which WALL-E and EVE admire together.