History
Main article: History of Estonia

Prehistory
Main article: Ancient Estonia
Bronze Age stone-cist graves at Jõelähtme

The oldest known settlement in Estonia is the Pulli settlement that dates to the early 9th millennium BC, making it at least 11,000 years old. The earliest human habitation during the Mesolithic period is connected to the Kunda culture. Neolithic ceramics of the Narva culture appeared in around 5300 BC. 

The Comb Ceramic culture emerged around 3900 BC. Its people, who were hunters and gatherers, lived near bodies of water. Raw materials like amber and flint were widely distributed through large trade networks. The culture also likely practiced religious beliefs, with animal and human figures made from bone and amber and deliberately shattered clay pieces, being found at settlement and burial sites. 

The emergence of the Corded Ware culture, which introduced primitive farming and animal husbandry, began approximately 2800 BC. Archaeological estimates place the population within Estonian territory at c. 10,000 inhabitants in 2000 BC, growing from c. 6000 in around 3900 BC.

The first hillfort settlements were established in the Bronze Age. A transition from hunter-fisher subsistence to single-farm-based settlement started around 1000 BC, and was complete by around 500 BC. The large amount of bronze objects indicates active communication with Scandinavian and Germanic tribes. During the Iron Age, the local iron production began around 200 BC; north Estonia, particularly the coastal region of Virumaa, emerged as a trade hub. North Estonian settlers gradually moved into nearby areas in the Baltic Sea region, spreading the Proto-Finnic language.

The Viking Age
Main article: Viking Age in Estonia

The Estonian coast was a key trade hub situated on a major waterway, making it both a target and a starting point for numerous raids. Coastal Estonians, particularly the Saaremaa islanders, adopted a Viking lifestyle. Several Scandinavian sagas referred to major confrontations with Estonians, notably when 7th-century "Estonian Vikings" defeated and killed Ingvar Harra, the King of the Swedes. In c. 1030, Grand Prince Yaroslav the Wise of Kievan Rus' attempted to subjugate the Chuds (as East Slavic sources called Estonians and related Finnic tribes) in southeast Estonia and captured Tartu. Chuds (Sosols) destroyed this foothold in 1061. In 1187, Estonians, Curonians, and Karelians sacked Sigtuna, a major Swedish city at the time.

Pre-Christian independent Estonian counties (maakond), c. 1200

Estonia had two regional cultures in this period. Northern and western coastal areas maintained close connections with Scandinavia, while the inland had stronger ties to the Balts and the principality of Pskov. Ancient Estonia had a professional warrior caste, while international trade provided nobles with wealth and prestige. This era's Estonian burial sites often contain both individual and collective graves, with artefacts like weapons and jewelry reflecting the shared material culture of Scandinavia and Northern Europe. Very little is known about the religious beliefs of medieval Estonians prior to Christianisation. A 1229 chronicle mentions Tharapita as the supreme deity of the islanders of Saaremaa (Ösel). Sacred groves, particularly of oak trees, factored prominently into pagan worship practices.

In the early centuries AD, Estonia's first administrative subdivisions emerged, primarily the parish (Estonian: kihelkond) and the county (Estonian: maakond), usually including multiple parishes. Parishes were commonly centred on hill forts and ruled by local nobles. By the 13th century, Estonia was divided into eight major counties – Harjumaa, Järvamaa, Läänemaa, Revala, Saaremaa, Sakala, Ugandi, and Virumaa – as well as several smaller, single-parish counties. Counties operated independently, forming only loose defensive alliances against foreign threats.

Christianisation and the Middle Ages
Main articles: Livonian Crusade, Terra Mariana, and Danish Estonia
Estonia and Livonia after the 12th/13th century Northern crusades

In 1199, Pope Innocent III declared a crusade to "defend the Christians of Livonia". The crusading German Swordbrothers, who had previously subjugated Livonians, Latgalians, and Selonians, started campaigning against Estonians in 1208. The following years saw many raids and counter-raids. In 1217, the Estonians suffered a significant defeat in the battle where their most prominent leader, Lembitu, an elder of Sakala, was killed. In 1219, the armies of King Valdemar II of Denmark defeated Estonians in the Battle of Lyndanisse (Tallinn), and conquered northern Estonia. In the uprising of 1223, Estonians were able to push the German and Danish invaders out of the whole country, except Tallinn. The crusaders soon resumed their offensive, and in 1227, Saaremaa was the last Estonian county to surrender and convert to Christianity.

In the 13th century, the newly Christian territory of present-day Estonia and Latvia was named Terra Mariana; later it became known simply as Livonia. North Estonia became part of the Kingdom of Denmark. The rest was divided between Swordbrothers and the prince-bishops of Dorpat and Ösel–Wiek. In 1236, the Swordbrothers merged into the then larger Teutonic Order (becoming its regional branch, the "Livonian Order"). In 1343, a major anti-German uprising encompassed north Estonia and Saaremaa. The Teutonic Order suppressed the rebellion by 1345, and the next year bought the Estonian lands from the king of Denmark. The German upper-class minority consolidated its power after the unsuccessful rebellion. For the subsequent centuries, Low German remained the language of the ruling elite in both Estonian cities and the countryside.

Lübeck Law Codex for Tallinn

Tallinn, the capital of Danish Estonia, founded on the site of Lindanise, adopted the Lübeck law and received full town rights in 1248. The Hanseatic League controlled trade on the Baltic Sea, and the four largest cities in Estonia became members: Tallinn, Tartu, Pärnu, and Viljandi. Protected by stone walls and membership in the Hansa, prosperous cities like Tallinn and Tartu often defied other rulers of medieval Livonia. In 1435, a treaty establishing the Livonian Confederation was signed by representatives of the Livonian Order, the bishoprics, and the major cities.

The Reformation began in central Europe in 1517, and soon spread northward to Livonia despite some opposition by the Livonian Order. Towns were the first to embrace Protestantism in the 1520s, and by the 1530s, the majority of the landowners and rural population had adopted Lutheranism. Church services were now conducted in the vernacular, which initially meant Low German, but from the 1530s onward, the regular religious services were held in Estonian.

Swedish and Russian rule
Main articles: Swedish Estonia, Governorate of Estonia, and Governorate of Livonia

In 1558, Tsar Ivan the Terrible of Russia (Muscovy) invaded Livonia, starting the Livonian War. The Livonian Order was decisively defeated in 1560. The majority of Livonia accepted Polish rule, while Reval and the nobles of Northern Estonia swore loyalty to the Swedish king, and the Bishop of Ösel-Wiek sold his lands to the Danish king. Russian forces gradually conquered the majority of Livonia, but in the late 1570s, the Polish-Lithuanian and Swedish armies started their own offensives, and the bloody war finally ended in 1583 with Russian defeat. As a result of the war, Northern Estonia became the Swedish Duchy of Estonia, Southern Estonia became the Polish Duchy of Livonia, and Saaremaa remained under Danish control. Wars between Sweden and Poland-Lithuania continued until 1629, when the victorious Sweden acquired south Estonia and northern Latvia. Sweden gained Saaremaa from Denmark in 1645. The wars cut the population of Estonia from about 250–270,000 people in the mid-16th century to 115–120,000 in the 1630s.

Academia Gustaviana, now the University of Tartu, was founded in 1632 by King Gustavus Adolphus

The Swedish era in Estonia was marked by both religious repression and significant reforms. Initially, it brought Protestant puritans who opposed traditional Estonian beliefs and practices, leading to witch trials and bans on folk music. While large parts of the rural population remained in serfdom, legal reforms under King Charles XI of Sweden strengthened both serfs' and free tenant farmers' land usage and inheritance rights, resulting in this period's reputation as "The Good Old Swedish Time" in historical memory. King Gustavus Adolphus established gymnasiums in Tartu (which became the university in 1632) and Tallinn. Printers were established in both towns. The beginnings of the Estonian-language public education system appeared in the 1680s, largely owing to Bengt Forselius. The population of Estonia grew rapidly until about 20% of the population died in the Great Famine of 1695–97.

During the 1700–1721 Great Northern War, the Tsardom of Russia (Muscovy) conquered the whole of Estonia by 1710. The war and plague again devastated the population of Estonia, with the 1712 population estimated at only 150,000–170,000. Russian administration restored all the political and landholding rights of Baltic Germans. The rights of local farmers reached their lowest point, as serfdom completely dominated agricultural relations during the 18th century. Tsarist regime sought to avoid conflicts with the local nobility, and the Baltic autonomous "special order" remained largely in effect until the late 19th century, marking a distinctive period of localised governance within the Russian Empire. Although serfdom had been abolished in Estonia in 1816–1819, major reforms improving farmers' rights started only in the mid-19th century.

National awakening and independence
Main articles: Estonian national awakening, Estonian Declaration of Independence, and History of Estonia § Interwar period (1920–1939)
Friedrich Reinhold Kreutzwald (1803–1882), author of the Estonian national epic Kalevipoeg (by Johann Köler, 1864)

The Estonian national awakening began in the 1850s as several leading figures started promoting an Estonian national identity among the general populace. Widespread farm buyouts by Estonians and the resulting rapidly growing class of land-owning farmers provided the economic basis for the formation of this new "Estonian identity". In 1857 Johann Voldemar Jannsen started publishing the first successful Estonian-language weekly newspaper, and began popularising the denomination of oneself as eestlane (Estonian). The first nationwide movements formed, such as a campaign to establish an Estonian-language secondary school, the founding of the Society of Estonian Literati and the Estonian Students' Society, and the first national song festival, held in 1869 in Tartu. The national epic Kalevipoeg was published in 1862, and 1870 saw the first performances of Estonian theatre. In 1878 a major split happened in the national movement. The moderate wing led by Jakob Hurt focused on development of culture and Estonian education, while the radical wing led by Carl Robert Jakobson started demanding increased political and economical rights.

In the 1890s, the central government of the Russian Empire launched a Russification campaign in order to tie the Baltic governorates more closely to the empire administratively and culturally. Russian language replaced German and Estonian in most secondary schools and universities, and many societal activities in local languages were suppressed. In the late 1890s, prominent figures like Jaan Tõnisson and Konstantin Päts rose in a new surge of nationalism. In the early 20th century, Estonians started taking over their German-run town governments.
During the 1905 Revolution, the first legal Estonian political parties were founded. An Estonian national congress was convened and demanded the unification of Estonian areas into a single autonomous territory and an end to Russification. The unrest was accompanied by both peaceful demonstrations and violent riots. The Tsarist government responded with a brutal crackdown; some 500 people were executed and hundreds more jailed or deported to Siberia.

In 1917, following the collapse of the Russian Empire, the Russian Provisional Government yielded to popular demand and the two main Estonian-speaking governorates were merged into one Autonomous Governorate of Estonia, and the Estonian Provincial Assembly was then elected. Bolsheviks seized power in Estonia in November 1917, and disbanded the Provincial Assembly. However, the Provincial Assembly established the Salvation Committee, and during the short interlude between Russian retreat and German arrival, the committee declared the independence of Estonia on 24 February 1918, and formed the Estonian Provisional Government. German occupation immediately followed, but after Germany's capitulation in World War I, they were forced to return power to the Estonian government on 19 November 1918.

Estonian armoured train during the war of independence

On 28 November 1918 Soviet Russia invaded, starting the Estonian War of Independence. The Red Army came within 30 km of Tallinn, but in January 1919, the Estonian Army, led by Johan Laidoner, went on a counter-offensive, ejecting Bolshevik forces from Estonia within a few months. Renewed Soviet attacks failed, and in spring, the Estonian army, in co-operation with White Russian forces, advanced into Russia and Latvia. In June 1919, Estonia defeated the German Landeswehr which had attempted to dominate Latvia. The Red Army launched a final offensive against Narva in late 1919, but failed to achieve a breakthrough. On 2 February 1920, the Tartu Peace Treaty was signed by Estonia and Soviet Russia, with the latter pledging to permanently give up all sovereign claims to Estonia.

Estonian Constituent Assembly, opening session on 23 April 1919 

In April 1919, the Estonian Constituent Assembly was elected. They passed a sweeping land reform and adopted a highly liberal constitution, establishing Estonia as a parliamentary democracy. Estonia joined the League of Nations in 1921. Estonia enjoyed rapid economic growth during the interwar period. Land reforms improved the farmers' conditions, but the country also prospered from industrialisation and the development of oil shale mining. With independence, most economic links with Russia dissolved, but trade rapidly reoriented towards Western markets. Estonia's cultural-autonomy law for ethnic minorities, adopted in 1925, was one of the most liberal of its time.

The Great Depression strained Estonia's political system, and in 1933 the right-wing Vaps movement spearheaded a constitutional reform establishing a strong presidency. On 12 March 1934 the acting head of state, Konstantin Päts, extended a state of emergency over the entire country, under the pretext that the Vaps movement had been planning a coup. Päts ruled by decree for several years while parliament did not reconvene ("era of silence"). The Päts régime was relatively benign compared to other authoritarian régimes in interwar Europe, never using violence against political opponents. A 1937 referendum adopted a new constitution. In 1938, an election including opposition candidates provided a new bicameral parliament. Estonia signed non-aggression pacts with the Soviet Union in 1932, and with Germany in 1939. In 1939, Estonia declared neutrality, but this proved futile in World War II.

Occupations
Main articles: Estonia in World War II, Occupation of the Baltic states, and Estonian SSR
Ten former Estonian prime ministers and 56 government members were executed or perished in captivity of the Soviet occupation regime after 1940 (memorial plaque at the seat of government in Toompea, Tallinn)

A week before the outbreak of World War II, the 23 August 1939 Nazi-Soviet Pact secretly assigned Estonia to the Soviet Union's sphere of influence. In September 1939, during the Soviet invasion of Poland, Joseph Stalin pressured the Estonian government into signing a "mutual assistance treaty", allowing the USSR to establish military bases in Estonia. On 14 June 1940, the Soviet Union instituted a full naval and air blockade on Estonia, and on 16 June, demanded free passage of the Red Army into Estonia and the establishment of a pro-Soviet government. Feeling that resistance was hopeless, the Estonian government complied and Soviet occupation began. On 6 August 1940, Estonia was formally annexed by the Soviet Union as the Estonian SSR. The USSR established a repressive terror regime in occupied Estonia, targeting the country's elite for destruction. Hundreds of people were executed and, on 14 June 1941, c. 11,000 Estonians were deported to Russia, where most would be killed.

When Germany launched Operation Barbarossa against the Soviet Union on 22 June, the Summer War began in Estonia. The Soviet authorities conscripted around 34,000 young Estonian men; fewer than 30% would survive the war. Soviet extermination battalions adopted a scorched-earth policy, massacring civilians in the process, and NKVD units executed political prisoners who could not be evacuated. Thousands of Estonians joined anti-Soviet partisan groups known as the Forest Brothers. The Soviets evacuated Tallinn by sea in late August 1941, suffering massive losses in the process. A puppet Estonian Self-Administration was established, and occupied Estonia was merged into Reichskommissariat Ostland. About a thousand Estonian Jews were killed in 1941 and numerous forced labour camps were established. German occupation authorities initially started recruiting men into volunteer units, but forced conscription was instituted in 1943, eventually leading to formation of the Estonian Waffen-SS division. Thousands of Estonians escaped to Finland, where many volunteered to fight together with Finns against Soviets.

Tallinn Old Town after bombing by the Soviet air force (March 1944)

The Red Army reached the Estonian borders again in early 1944, but its advance into Estonia was stopped in heavy fighting near Narva for six months by German forces, including numerous Estonian units. In March, the Soviet Air Force carried out heavy bombing raids against Tallinn and other Estonian towns. In July, the Soviets started a major offensive from the south, forcing the Germans to abandon mainland Estonia in September, with the Estonian islands being abandoned in November. As German forces were retreating from Tallinn, the last pre-war prime minister Jüri Uluots appointed a government headed by Otto Tief in an unsuccessful attempt to restore Estonia's independence. Tens of thousands of Estonians fled westwards from the Soviets. Estonia lost around one fourth of its population through war-related deaths, deportations and evacuations.

Estonian Anti-Soviet resistance fighters after a shooting exercise in 1953

The United States, United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the majority of other Western countries considered the annexation of Estonia by the Soviet Union illegal. Legal continuity of the Estonian state was preserved through the government-in-exile and the Estonian diplomatic representatives which Western governments continued to recognise. Thousands of Estonians opposing the second Soviet occupation joined a guerrilla movement known as the "Forest Brothers". The armed resistance was heaviest in the first few years after the war, but Soviet authorities gradually wore it down through attrition, and resistance effectively ceased to exist in the mid-1950s. The Soviets initiated a policy of collectivisation, but as farmers remained opposed to it a campaign of terror was unleashed. In March 1949 about 20,000 Estonians were deported to Siberia. Collectivization was fully completed soon afterwards.

The Soviet Union began Russification, with hundreds of thousands of Russians and people of other Soviet nationalities being induced to settle in Estonia, which eventually threatened to turn Estonians into a minority in their own land. In 1945 Estonians formed 97% of the population, but by 1989 their share of the population had fallen to 62%. The military presence was pervasive, with closed military zones occupying around one-fifth of the Estonian land and the entire surrounding sea. Access to coastal areas required permits, rendering the Estonian people physically isolated from the world outside the USSR. Economically, heavy industry was strongly prioritised, but this did not improve the well-being of the local population, and caused massive environmental damage through pollution. Living standards under the Soviet occupation kept falling further behind nearby independent Finland.

Independence restored
In the Baltic Way on 23 August 1989, two million people formed a human chain across three countries in a mass demonstration against the Soviet occupation.

The introduction of perestroika by the Soviet government in 1987 enabled political activism in Estonia, sparking the Singing Revolution, a peaceful movement towards independence. One of the first major acts of resistance was the Phosphorite War, an environmental protest against Soviet plans to establish large phosphate mines in Virumaa. On 23 August 1987, the Hirvepark meeting in Tallinn called for the public disclosure of the secret protocols of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact that had led to Estonia's occupation. In 1988, new political movements emerged, including the Popular Front of Estonia, a moderate faction within the independence movement, and the Estonian National Independence Party, which became the first non-communist political party registered in the Soviet Union. The parliament of Soviet-controlled Estonia asserted the primacy of Estonian laws with the Sovereignty Declaration on 16 November 1988, inspiring similar declarations across other Soviet republics. On 23 August 1989, two million people formed the Baltic Way, a human chain spanning Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, to demonstrate unity in pursuit of independence.

In 1990, the Congress of Estonia was formed as the representative body of Estonian citizens. In March 1991, a referendum was held where 78.4% of voters supported independence, and during the coup attempt in Moscow, Estonia declared restoration of independence on 20 August. Soviet authorities recognised Estonian independence on 6 September, and on 17 September Estonia was admitted into the United Nations. The last units of the Russian army left Estonia in 1994. In 1992 radical economic reforms were launched for switching over to a market economy, including privatisation and currency reform. Estonian foreign policy since independence has been oriented toward the West, and in 2004 Estonia joined both the European Union and NATO. In 2011, Estonia joined the eurozone and adopted the EU single currency.