History
Main article: History of Portugal

Prehistory
Main article: Prehistoric Iberia

The region has been inhabited by humans since approximately 400,000 years ago. Later Neanderthals roamed the northern Iberian peninsula and a tooth has been found at Nova da Columbeira cave in Estremadura. Homo sapiens sapiens arrived in Portugal around 35,000 years ago and spread rapidly, with the earliest signs of settlement dating to 5500 BC. Pre-Celtic tribes inhabited Portugal. The Cynetes developed a written language, leaving stele, which are mainly found in the south. Celts inhabited mainly in the north and center of Portugal leaving lasting traces in the culture and language.

Historical overview of Portugal
Main articles: Lusitania, Gallaecia, and Hispania
The Roman Temple of Évora, built in the 1st century

Romans first invaded the Iberian Peninsula in 219 BC. The Carthaginians, Rome's opponent in the Punic Wars, were expelled from their coastal colonies. During Julius Caesar's rule, almost the entire peninsula was annexed to Rome, facing resistance from local tribes leaded by Viriathus.

In 409, with the decline of the Roman Empire, the Iberian Peninsula was occupied by Germanic tribes. Western Iberia initially formed the Suebian Kingdom with its capital in Braga. The Visigoths eventually defeated the Suebi and ruled until the early eighth century. 
Most of the Iberian Peninsula was invaded from the south and became part of al-Andalus in 726, following the establishment of the Umayyad Caliphate.

After defeating the Visigoths, the Umayyad Caliphate started expanding rapidly in the peninsula. Beginning in 726, the land that is now Portugal became part of the Umayyad Caliphate until its collapse in 750. That year the west of the empire gained its independence under Abd al-Rahman I with the establishment of the Emirate of Córdoba lasting until 1031, with its dissolution into 23 small kingdoms. Most of present-day Portugal fell into the hands of the Taifa of Badajoz, and in 1022 the Taifa of Seville. Those petty kingdoms were conquered by the Almoravids in 1086, then by the Almohads in 1147.

Invasions from the North also occurred in this period, with Viking incursions raiding the coast between the 9th and 11th centuries, including Lisbon. This resulted in the establishment of small Norse settlements in the coastline between Douro and Minho.

Reconquista
Main article: Portugal in the Reconquista
Vímara Peres was the first Count of Portugal.

The Reconquista was a period when Christians reconquered the Iberian Peninsula from Moorish domination. An Asturian Visigothic noble named Pelagius of Asturias was elected leader in 718 by many of the ousted Visigoth nobles. After defeating the Moors in the Battle of Covadonga in 722, Pelagius was proclaimed king, thus founding the Christian Kingdom of Asturias and starting the war of Christian reconquest.

At the end of the 9th century, the region of Portugal between the rivers Minho and Douro was reconquered from the Moors by nobleman and knight Vímara Peres on the orders of King Alfonso III of Asturias. Finding many towns deserted, he decided to repopulate and rebuild them.

After annexing the County of Portugal, Alfonso III of Asturias knighted Vímara Peres, in 868, as the first Count of Portus Cale. The region became known as Portucale, Portugale, and Portugália. With the forced abdication of Alfonso III in 910, the Kingdom of Asturias split into three separate kingdoms; they were reunited in 924 under the crown of León. The first County lasted until 1071, when the Kingdom of Galicia took over the region following a rebelion. A few years later, in 1096, Alfonso VI of León bestowed the County, thus refounding it, to Henry of Burgundy and married him to his daughter, Teresa of León.

Independence
Main article: Portugal in the Middle Ages
King Afonso I, c. 13th century

After the death of Count Henry, in 1112, a dispute erupted, culminating at the Battle of São Mamede, in 1128, where Afonso Henriques defeated the forces of his mother Countess Teresa and her lover Fernão Peres de Trava, establishing himself as sole leader of the county achieving de facto independence. In 1129, the capital was transferred from Guimarães to Coimbra. Afonso's campaigns were successful and in 1139, he obtained a victory in the Battle of Ourique, so was proclaimed King of Portugal by his soldiers. Afonso was recognised as king of Portugal in 1143 by King Alfonso VII of León, and in 1179 by Pope Alexander III, with the papal bull Manifestis Probatum.

Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by military monastic orders, continued pushing southwards against the Moors until 1249 with the capture of Algarve and the expel of the last Moorish settlements. With minor readjustments, Portugal's borders have remained the same, making it one of the oldest established countries in Europe.

In 1348-49 Portugal, as with the rest of Europe, was devastated by the Black Death. In 1373, Portugal, during the reign of King Ferdinand I, in the midst of the Fernandine Wars made an alliance with England, which would be reinforced later with the signing of the Treaty of Windsor, making it the oldest standing alliance in the world.

Age of Discovery
Main article: Portuguese Empire
Areas that were, at some point, part of the Portuguese Empire

In 1383 John I of Castile and Beatrice of Portugal, the only surviving legitimate child of Ferdinand I of Portugal, claimed the throne of Portugal. John of Aviz led a revolt against this claim and defeated the Castilians in the Battle of Aljubarrota, with the House of Aviz becoming the ruling house which led Portugal to the limelight of European politics and culture.

Portugal spearheaded European exploration of the world under the sponsorship of Prince Henry the Navigator, and made several seminal advancements in nautical science. The Portuguese explored the Indian Ocean, established trade routes in most of southern Asia, and sent the first direct European maritime trade and diplomatic missions to China and Japan. In 1415, Portugal acquired its first colonies by conquering Ceuta. Throughout the 15th century, Portuguese explorers sailed the coast of Africa, establishing trading posts for commodities, ranging from gold to slavery.

The Chafariz d'El-Rey painting depicts urban life in the 16th century Lisbon Alfama.

The Treaty of Tordesillas, signed in 1494, divided the newly located lands outside Europe between Portugal and Spain along a line west of Cape Verde. In 1500, Gaspar Corte-Real reached modern-day Canada and founded the town of Portugal Cove-St. Philip's.
In 1500, Pedro Álvares Cabral landed on Brazil and claimed it for Portugal. Portuguese sailors set out to reach Eastern Asia, landing in Taiwan, Japan, Timor, Flores, and the Moluccas.

Between 1519 and 1522 Ferdinand Magellan organised a Spanish expedition to the East Indies which resulted in the first circumnavigation of the globe. The Treaty of Zaragoza, signed in 1529, divided the Pacific Ocean between Spain and Portugal.

Iberian Union and Restoration
Main article: Iberian Union

After King Sebastian, followed by his grand-uncle King Henry died without heirs, it resulted in a succession crisis in 1580. Philip II of Spain claimed the throne in 1580, under the pretext that his mother, Isabella of Portugal, was a Portuguese princess. Philip II of Spain was accepted as king of Portugal, forming a personal union of the kingdoms, depriving Portugal of an independent foreign policy which led to its involvement in the Eighty Years' War.

From 1595 to 1663 the Dutch-Portuguese War primarily involved Dutch companies invading Portuguese colonies and commercial interests, resulting in the loss of Portugal's Indian sea trade monopoly. On 1 December 1640, John, Duke of Braganza spearheaded an uprising backed by disgruntled nobles and was proclaimed king, ending 60 years of the Iberian Union under the House of Habsburg and the beginning of the House of Braganza. Following its defeat in the Portuguese Restoration War, Spain recognized John as king of Portugal. John V reign saw an influx of gold into the royal treasury, supplied largely by the royal fifth and a gold rush that was one of the largest movements from Europe to an American colony.

Lisbon was struck by a major earthquake on 1 November 1755. Following the earthquake, King Joseph I gave his prime minister, Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, 1st Marquis of Pombal, more power, becoming an enlightened despot.

Constitutional monarchy
Main articles: History of Portugal (1777–1834) and History of Portugal (1834–1910)
The transfer of the Portuguese court to Brazil in 1808

In 1807 Portugal refused Napoleon's demand to join the Continental System of embargo against the United Kingdom; a French invasion under General Junot followed, and Lisbon was captured in 1807. British intervention in the Peninsular War helped maintain Portuguese independence; the last French troops were expelled in 1812. During the Napoleonic invasions, the Portuguese royal family transferred the court to Rio de Janeiro, in Brazil, making it the capital between 1808 and 1821.

In 1820, a constitutionalist insurrection began in Porto which forced King John VI and his court to return to mainland Portugal in 1821. The death of John in 1826 led to a crisis of royal succession. His eldest son, Pedro I of Brazil, briefly became Pedro IV of Portugal, but neither the Portuguese nor Brazilians wanted a unified monarchy.

Consequently, Pedro abdicated the Portuguese crown in favour of his 7-year-old daughter, Maria da Glória. Dissatisfaction at Pedro's constitutional reforms led the "absolutist" faction of landowners and the church to proclaim his brother Miguel king in February 1828. This led to the Liberal Wars, in which Pedro forced Miguel to abdicate in favour of his daughter and go into exile in 1834.

First Republic and Estado Novo
Main articles: First Portuguese Republic and Estado Novo (Portugal)
José Relvas proclaiming the republic on 5 October 1910, at Lisbon City Hall

In 1908, King Carlos I and his son and heir, Luís Filipe, Prince Royal, were assassinated by republican sympathizers. Later, in 1910, the monarchy was replaced with a republic. During World War I, Portugal fought for the Allies; however, the war hurt its weak economy.

Political instability and economic weaknesses created chaos and unrest during the First Republic. These conditions led to its overthown in 1926, establishing the Ditadura Nacional, which evolved into the right-wing dictatorship of the Estado Novo, under António de Oliveira Salazar in 1933.

Portugal remained neutral in World War II. From the 1940s to 1960s, Portugal was a founding member of NATO, OECD, and EFTA, it also joined the United Nations in 1955. New economic development projects and relocation of mainland Portuguese citizens into the overseas provinces in Africa were initiated, with Angola and Mozambique being the main destinations. However, indigenous peoples were second-class citizens and sidelined on those development projects, which led to the emergence of independence movements in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea in the 1960s, culminating in 1961 in the Portuguese Colonial War, which lasted until 1974.

Return to democracy
Main articles: Carnation Revolution and Third Portuguese Republic

On 25 April 1974, the Carnation Revolution overthrew the Estado Novo beginning the transition to democracy. Portugal continued to be governed by several provisional governments until the legislative election of 1976. After the transition to democracy, Portugal flipped between socialism and neoliberalism. Land reform and nationalisations were enforced; the Portuguese Constitution was rewritten to accommodate socialist and communist principles. most of which were later removed in the constitutional revisions of 1982 and 1989. In 1986, Portugal joined the European Economic Community, precursor to the European Union. Portugal's economy progressed considerably as a result of European Structural and Investment Funds and easier access to foreign markets. Portugal's last overseas territory, Macau, was handed over to China in 1999. The 2010–2014 Portuguese financial crisis led to an international bailout with intense austerity policies, resulting in social tensions.

Cite error: There are <ref group=lower-alpha> tags or {{efn}} templates on this page, but the references will not show without a {{reflist|group=lower-alpha}} template or {{notelist}} template (see the help page).