History
Main article: History of Senegal

Early and pre-colonial eras

Archaeological findings throughout the area indicate that Senegal was inhabited in prehistoric times and has been continuously occupied by various ethnic groups. Some kingdoms were created between the 6th and 14th centuries, such as Takrur in the 6th century, Namandiru, and the Jolof Empire in the 13th and 14th centuries. Eastern Senegal was once part of the Ghana Empire.

Islam was introduced by the Toucouleur and Soninke through their contact with the Almoravid dynasty of the Maghreb, who helped spread it with their Toucouleur allies. This movement faced resistance from ethnicities of traditional religions, the Serers in particular.

In the 13th and 14th centuries, the area came under the influence of empires to the east; the Jolof Empire was also founded during this time. In the Senegambia region, between 1300 and 1900, close to one-third of the population was enslaved, typically as a result of being taken captive in warfare.

In the 14th century, the Jolof Empire grew more powerful, having united Cayor and the kingdoms of Baol, Siné, Saloum, Waalo, Futa Tooro and Bambouk, covering much of what is now Senegal and part of present-day West Africa. The empire was a voluntary confederacy of various states rather than a state built on military conquest. The empire was founded by Ndiadiane Ndiaye, a part Serer and part Toucouleur, who was able to form a coalition with many ethnicities, but collapsed around 1549 following the defeat and death of Lele Fouli Fak at the hands of Amari Ngone Sobel Fall.

Colonial era
Main articles: Senegambia (Dutch West India Company) and French conquest of Senegal
The Portuguese Empire was the first European power to colonize Senegal, beginning with the arrival of Dinis Dias in 1444 at Gorée Island and ending in 1888, when the Portuguese gave Ziguinchor to the French.

In the mid-15th century, the Portuguese landed on the Senegal coastline, followed by traders representing other countries, including the French. Various European powers—Portugal, the Netherlands, and Great Britain—competed for trade in the area from the 15th century onward.

In 1677, France gained control of what had become a minor hub in the Atlantic slave trade: the island of Gorée near modern Dakar, used as a base to purchase enslaved people from the warring chiefdoms on the mainland.

European missionaries introduced Christianity to Senegal and the Casamance in the 19th century. It was only in the 1850s that the French began to expand onto the Senegalese mainland, after they abolished slavery and began promoting an abolitionist doctrine, adding native kingdoms like the Waalo, Cayor, Baol, and Jolof. French colonists under Governor Louis Faidherbe progressively invaded and took over all the kingdoms, except the Serer Kingdoms of Sine and Saloum.

French and local slave traders in Gorée, 18th century

Yoro Dyao was in command of the canton of Foss-Galodjina and was set over Wâlo (Ouâlo) by Louis Faidherbe, where he served as a chief from 1861 to 1914. Senegalese resistance to the French expansion was led in part by Lat-Dior, Damel of Cayor, and Maad a Sinig Kumba Ndoffene Famak Joof (the Maad a Sinig, King of Sine), resulting in the famous Battle of Logandème―the battle in which the Serer King of Sine went to war against the mighty French colonial empire, where the French decided to take revenge against Sine following their humiliating defeat at the Battle of Djilor. The Battle of Logandème was the first battle on Senegambian soil in which the French employed cannonballs.

In 1915, over 300 Senegalese soldiers came under Australian command in preparation for the capture of Damascus, preceding the arrival of Lawrence of Arabia. This deployment created diplomatic tensions between French and British interests in the region.

The Battle of Dakar (23–25 September 1940) was an unsuccessful Allied attempt to capture the strategic port and overthrow the pro-German Vichy French colonial administration.

On 25 November 1958, Senegal became an autonomous republic within the French Union.

Independence
The short-lived Mali Federation
In January 1959, Senegal and the French Sudan merged to form the Mali Federation, which became fully independent on 20 June 1960, as a result of a transfer of power agreement signed with France on 4 April 1960. Due to internal political difficulties, the Federation broke up on 20 August 1960 when Senegal and French Sudan (renamed the Republic of Mali) each proclaimed independence.

Léopold Sédar Senghor was elected Senegal's first president in August 1960. Pro-African, Senghor advocated a brand of African socialism.

After the breakup of the Mali Federation, Senghor and Prime Minister Mamadou Dia governed together under a parliamentary system. In December 1962, their political rivalry led to an attempted coup by Dia. The coup was put down without bloodshed, and Dia was arrested and imprisoned. Senegal adopted a new constitution that consolidated the President's power.

People in Dakar in 1962

Senghor was considerably more tolerant of opposition than most African leaders of the 1960s. Nonetheless, political activity was somewhat restricted for a time. Senghor's party, the Senegalese Progressive Union (now the Socialist Party of Senegal), was the only legally permitted party from 1965 until 1975. In the latter year, Senghor allowed the formation of two opposition parties that began operation in 1976—a Marxist party (the African Independence Party) and a liberal party (the Senegalese Democratic Party).

The 1960s and early 1970s saw persistent violations of Senegal's borders by the Portuguese military from Portuguese Guinea. In response, Senegal petitioned the United Nations Security Council in 1963, 1965, 1969 (in response to shelling by Portuguese artillery), 1971 and 1972.

1980 to present

In 1980, Senghor decided to retire from politics. In 1981, he transferred power to his hand-picked successor, Abdou Diouf. Former prime minister Mamadou Dia, who was Senghor's rival, ran for election in 1983 against Diouf, but lost.

In the 1980s, Boubacar Lam discovered Senegalese oral history that was initially compiled by the Tuculor noble, Yoro Dyâo, not long after World War I, which documented migrations into West Africa from the Nile Valley; ethnic groups, from the Senegal River to the Niger Delta, retained traditions of having an eastern origin.

Senegal joined with The Gambia to form the nominal Senegambia Confederation on 1 February 1982. However, the union was dissolved in 1989. Despite peace talks, a southern separatist group (Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance or MFDC) in the Casamance region has clashed sporadically with government forces since 1982 in the Casamance conflict. In the early 21st century, violence has subsided, and President Macky Sall held talks with rebels in Rome in December 2012.

Abdou Diouf was president between 1981 and 2000. He encouraged broader political participation, reduced government involvement in the economy, and widened Senegal's diplomatic engagements, particularly with other developing nations. Domestic politics on occasion spilled over into street violence, border tensions, and a violent separatist movement in the southern region of the Casamance. Nevertheless, Senegal's commitment to democracy and human rights strengthened. Abdou Diouf served four terms as president.

During the Gulf War, over 500 Senegalese participated in the Battle of Khafji and the unexpected Liberation of Kuwait campaign, under the command of the U.S.-led coalition.

In the 1999 presidential election, opposition leader Abdoulaye Wade defeated Diouf, an election deemed free and fair by international observers. Senegal experienced its second peaceful transition of power, and its first from one political party to another. On 30 December 2004, President Wade announced that he would sign a peace treaty with the separatist group in the Casamance region. The Casamance conflict, however, has not yet been fully concluded as of 2025 despite several cease fires and treaties between the government and individual factions within the MFDC.

In March 2012, the incumbent president, Abdoulaye Wade, lost the presidential election, and Macky Sall was elected as the new President of Senegal. President Macky Sall was re-elected in 2019 elections. The presidential term was subsequently reduced from seven years to five years.

Senegalese President Macky Sall with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Sochi, Russia, 3 June 2022

Since 3 March 2021, Senegal has been rocked by a series of mass protests in response to the arrest of Ousmane Sonko for alleged rape and mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2023, the response to the protests turned increasingly violent, with Amnesty International counting 23 fatalities, most of which were caused by bullets fired by police or armed police collaborators.

In March 2024, opposition candidate Bassirou Diomaye Faye won Senegal's presidential election over the ruling coalition's candidate, becoming the youngest president in Senegal's history. In November 2024, Faye announced that France would withdraw its troops from Senegal and close its bases by the end of 2025.

On 1 July 2025, France handed over the Rufisque joint station to Senegal. Active since 1960, this facility was responsible for communications on the southern Atlantic coast and served as a listening post in efforts to combat maritime trafficking. The handover was conducted with minimal ceremony, involving only the signing of a report. On 17 July 2025, the two military sites were returned to the Senegalese government: the airport base and Camp Geille, a 5-hectare site located in Ouakam. Four villas located in Plateau, near the port, were also transferred to the Senegalese authorities.